Multiplatform ViewModel (#683)
JetBrains/kotlin-multiplatform-dev-docs: topics/compose/compose-viewmodel.md

the business logic of your app with the UI components.
With Compose Multiplatform, you can also use ViewModels in common code.

This page walks you through setting up and working with ViewModels in a multiplatform project:

* [Set up dependencies](#set-up-dependencies).
* [Use ViewModel in common code](#using-viewmodel-in-common-code).
* [Scope ViewModels to navigation destinations](#viewmodel-scoping-with-navigation-3).
* [Inject dependencies with Koin or Metro](#viewmodel-and-dependency-injection).
* [Choose how much of your ViewModel and UI code to share](#levels-of-code-sharing):
  from a fully shared approach to sharing only the repository or data layer.

## Set up dependencies

To share ViewModels and UI across platforms:

1. Define the dependencies in a Gradle version catalog file:

    ```toml
    [versions]
    androidx-viewmodel = "2.10.0"
    
    [libraries]
    androidx-lifecycle-viewmodel-compose = { module = "org.jetbrains.androidx.lifecycle:lifecycle-viewmodel-compose", version.ref = "androidx-viewmodel" }
    androidx-lifecycle-viewmodel-navigation3 = { module = "androidx.lifecycle:lifecycle-viewmodel-navigation3", version.ref = "androidx-viewmodel" }
    ``` 

>     > You can track changes to the multiplatform ViewModel implementation in our [What's new](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/kotlin-multiplatform-dev/whats-new-compose.html)

Reviewer: Should be an empty line after the code block.

    > or follow EAP releases in the [Compose Multiplatform changelog](https://github.com/JetBrains/compose-multiplatform/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md).
    >
    {style="tip"}
2. In the `build.gradle.kts` file of the KMP module, add the following dependencies to the `commonMain` source set:

    ```kotlin
    kotlin {
       // ...
       sourceSets {
           // ...
           commonMain.dependencies {
               implementation(libs.androidx.lifecycle.viewmodel.compose)
               implementation(libs.androidx.lifecycle.viewmodel.navigation3)
           }
           // ...
       }
    }
    ```
    {initial-collapse-state="collapsed" collapsible="true" collapsed-title="implementation(libs.androidx.lifecycle.viewmodel.compose)"}

> 3. If you have a desktop target, add the `kotlinx-coroutines-swing` dependency as well. 

Reviewer: If this is the last list item, I would make it not a list item.

> If you have a desktop target <...>:
> 1. In the Gradle version catalog:
> 2. In the build.gradle.kts:

This way the structure also mirrors adding the dependency to commonMain earlier.

   work correctly with Compose Multiplatform.
    
    In the Gradle version catalog:

    ```toml
    [versions]
    kotlinx-coroutines = "1.10.2"
    
    [libraries]
    kotlinx-coroutines-swing = { module = "org.jetbrains.kotlinx:kotlinx-coroutines-swing", version.ref = "kotlinx-coroutines" }
    ```
    
    In the `build.gradle.kts` file:
    
    ```kotlin
    kotlin {
       // ...
       sourceSets {
           // ...
           jvmMain.dependencies {
               implementation(libs.kotlinx.coroutines.swing)
           }
           // ...
       }
    }
    ```
    {initial-collapse-state="collapsed" collapsible="true" collapsed-title="implementation(libs.kotlinx.coroutines.swing)"}
     
    See the [`Dispatchers.Main` documentation](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.coroutines/kotlinx-coroutines-core/kotlinx.coroutines/-dispatchers/-main.html) for details.

Dependencies may differ depending on your code-sharing approach. See [](#levels-of-code-sharing) for details.

## Using ViewModel in common code

Compose Multiplatform provides a common `ViewModelStoreOwner` implementation, so using the `ViewModel` class

> in common code is not much different from Android best practices.

Reviewer: Should probably link the Android best practices for those who start with ViewModels here.

However, there is an important difference on non-JVM platforms, where type reflection for instantiating objects is not available. 
You cannot call the `viewModel()` function without parameters in common code.
Every time you create a `ViewModel` instance, you need to provide at least an initializer as an argument.

If only an initializer is provided, Compose Multiplatform creates a default factory under the hood.
However, you can implement your own factories and call more explicit versions of the common `viewModel()` function,
just like [with Jetpack Compose](https://developer.android.com/topic/libraries/architecture/viewmodel#jetpack-compose).

Let's define a ViewModel and wire it into a composable:

1. Define an `OrderViewModel` class, 

>    based on the [navigation sample](https://github.com/JetBrains/compose-multiplatform/tree/0e38f58b42d23ff6d0ad30b119d34fa1cd6ccedb/examples/nav_cupcake):

Reviewer: The sample is a bit on the older side now, and didn't let me smoothly follow the instructions after simply checking out and importing it (if that's what's implied). Ideally we update it to use the backing fields and newer dependencies so that there's less friction on the way to making it work.

   ```kotlin
   data class OrderUiState(val quantity: Int = 0, val price: String = "$0.00")

   class OrderViewModel : ViewModel() {
      val uiState: StateFlow<OrderUiState>
          field = MutableStateFlow(OrderUiState())

      fun setQuantity(n: Int) {
          field.update { it.copy(quantity = n, price = "$${n * 2}.00") }
      }
   }
   ```

    > This example uses explicit backing fields, stabilized in Kotlin 2.4.0. When using earlier versions,

>     > add the `-Xexplicit-backing-fields` compiler option or use the old backing fields pattern with `.asStateFlow()` instead.

Reviewer: Still feel it's useful to link the explanation here https://kotlinlang.org/docs/whatsnew23.html#explicit-backing-fields

    ) {
       // ...
    }
    ```

## ViewModel scoping with Navigation 3

When using ViewModels with Navigation 3 in common code,
ViewModels are not automatically scoped to navigation entries by default.
Without explicit scoping, each ViewModel will be tied to the `Activity` rather than the screen,
even after the user has navigated away.

To scope ViewModels and saveable Compose state per navigation entry,
pass the Navigation 3 entry decorators to `NavDisplay` when defining the navigation destinations:

```kotlin
import androidx.lifecycle.viewmodel.navigation3.rememberViewModelStoreNavEntryDecorator
import androidx.navigation3.runtime.rememberSaveableStateHolderNavEntryDecorator

//...

NavDisplay(
   entryDecorators = listOf(
       // Saves Compose state per entry
       rememberSaveableStateHolderNavEntryDecorator(),
       // Scopes ViewModel per entry
       rememberViewModelStoreNavEntryDecorator()
   ),
   backStack = backStack,
   entryProvider = entryProvider { }
)
```

## ViewModel and dependency injection

A dependency injection (DI) framework allows you to inject different dependencies into components
based on the current environment or target platform.

> To manage ViewModels, you can use Koin, Metro, or another DI framework that supports Kotlin Multiplatform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To manage ViewModels, you can use Koin, Metro, or any other DI framework that supports Kotlin Multiplatform.
```

* To share some code without sharing UI implementation,
  see the [shared logic tutorial](multiplatform-create-first-app.md).

The following examples show how to use ViewModel at different levels of code sharing.
All examples are based on the `OrderViewModel` class introduced above.

### Shared ViewModel and UI

In this approach, everything, including the `ViewModel` and the UI, is shared via Compose Multiplatform.
You write your app's UI code once, and it will work on all platforms.

```kotlin
@Composable
fun CupcakeApp(
   viewModel: OrderViewModel = viewModel { OrderViewModel() }
) {
   val uiState by viewModel.uiState.collectAsState()
    
   Column(modifier = Modifier.padding(16.dp)) {
       Text("Quantity: ${uiState.quantity}")
       Text("Price: ${uiState.price}")

       Button(onClick = { viewModel.setQuantity(6) }) {
           Text("Set Quantity to '6'")
       }
   }
}
```

### Shared ViewModel and platform-specific UI

In this approach, the `ViewModel` (business logic) is shared, but platforms have native UI implementations.
Learn more in [Set up ViewModel for Kotlin Multiplatform](https://developer.android.com/kotlin/multiplatform/viewmodel).

> 1. Since the UI is not shared in this case, you can switch from the Compose Multiplatform version of the ViewModel library to the `androidx.lifecycle` library.

Reviewer: Exactly since the UI is not shared, I would separate the Android instructions from iOS, because they can be implemented independently. So, `#### Android` and `#### iOS` sections. This also gets rid of the nested list for iOS.
